from the Rockefeller Commission report
the 22 years ago an army employee was
given an after-dinner cordial at a
meeting hosted by the CIA in Maryland
that army employee did not know and was
not told for 20 minutes that the
after-dinner drink had acid LSD in it
and one week later that employee was
dead early in the morning very early
about 1:30 in the morning in a hotel
room in New York City he got up and
before his CIA escort could prevent him
he ran right through a closed hotel
window which had the shades drawn over
it the window gave way and the employee
fell ten stories to his death
well that account in the Rockefeller
Commission report horrified most readers
but we can only imagine what it did to a
Maryland woman Alice Olsen and her two
sons Eric Olsen and Neal's Olsen they
had been told 22 years ago that Frank
Olsen their husband and their father a
civilian army employee working in
Maryland at the Fort Dietrich biological
warfare Research Center after leading a
perfectly normal and happy life had
inexplicably killed himself in New York
they were not told anything about the
LSD experiment that had set him off and
until they read the Rockefeller
Commission report 22 years afterwards
last month they had spent two decades
wracked with the guilt and the shame the
suicide in a family causes we spoke to
the Olsens this week
Ted Clark one of our reporters here at
the Washington bureau reached them at
their home by phone and here is his
conversation I'm talking to Nils Olsen
and Frederick Maryland notes could you
tell us briefly the story of your
father's death and circumstances
surrounding it midnight on November 28th
1953 as we understand it he had been
given LSD without his now it's at a
meeting that was held with several CIA
who were these on people between the CIA
and the Army Research installation that
my father worked for
they were at a meeting discussing
biological research and at during the
week-long meeting in November of 53 they
flipped him and five and four other top
level scientists LSD after dinner one
evening and then 20 minutes later they
were told that they had been given the
the LSD and they were going to be
observed to see their reactions to the
drug he developed two side effects to
the to the drug and returned from the
week-long meeting to our house my mother
noticed very dramatic changes in his
personality is being very despondent
depressed and very quiet and so on then
we went to work at Fort Detrick here in
Frederick
the following Monday and was considering
resigning from his his job there was
talk back into staying staying on and
then Tuesday it was decided that he
would go to see a psychiatrist up in New
York City to see psychiatrists Harold
Abram sentences name was a psychiatrist
who had a security clamp and therefore
was and we were told selected to be a
therapist to torture my father because
my father had a top-level security
clearance he talked with my father talk
to us Abramson for several days during
the week after he had been administered
the LSD then the Friday night November
27th 1950
she tell us when my mother to indicate
that he was doing okay that he'd be
coming home on Saturday November 28th
that was the last time that my mother
talked to him then we received a phone
call the next morning from a colleague
who received a phone call from a CIA
agent who was up in New York with my
father accompany him and that was when
we were notified that my father had
funds to his death out of the 10th floor
window of the hotel that was in New York
where's any explanation given to you
about why this had happened that he had
been a participant in this experiment
with LSD no we had no knowledge of that
we haven't received any communication
with whoever from the Central
Intelligence Agency and the only thing
we were told was that he jumped or fell
from the tenth floor window and it was
our understanding that he had just
suffered suffered a nervous breakdown
and good you know was very depressed and
my mother believed that during the
middle of the night he must have had a
severe nightmare a bad dream something
where he was just compelled to go to
full run across the room hotel room and
leap through a window at a closed window
and
the seats were drawn under windows so
that was all that we knew but he had
prior to this time it had led a happy
life and hadn't shown any signs of
depression
no he had not shown any signs my mother
says that they had a very good marriage
my father was a very loving person and
very a very giving sort of person who
loved his three children very much and
spent quite a bit of time with us
devoted a lot of energy it was his wife
and children and that was the thing that
tore through all of his friends is his
wife and you know the three children was
that we couldn't understand how he said
after being you know being such a good
warm stable sort of person the idea that
he could suddenly develop a nervous
breakdown was something we just put
comprehend when when was it that you
finally found out that he had been an
unwitting participant in this LSD 2011
1975 we received a phone call from a
friend
[Music]
information from Rockefeller Commission
report indicating that from the
information that they had stated in a
report that could be no other person and
our Father and then you have decided to
take action against the suit the CIA
that's correct what are you going to be
doing number one be able to get full
disclosure of the information
really my brother on the phone here Bai
in New York and two stations in
California KPFA and KPFK
yeah and we also have a station in Texas
KPFT I was going to ask if you know of
anybody else or if any of your father's
colleagues who participated in the same
experiment have you talked to any of
them or do you know who they are and the
material but it hasn't so far we promise
not to oh we know who he is there were
three others according to him one of
them is dead we know there's two others
are living and he refused to tell us the
names of those
well I think I have pretty much the
whole storyi
if you have any comments that you'd like
to add there's one comment that I have I
don't know what I know that this earlier
view but today well to some degree
during the press conference and
especially after we are aware that what
we do we go on through with a real
funeral ceremony for our father and it
was a funeral in the sense that we were
honoring him signifying his death in a
way that he couldn't be eulogized at the
time you got because no one knew the
true story serious proud of him the way
he had died and it didn't fit with the
kind of man that his friends family he
was to be and there was a kind of
feeling of what was happened today
ceremony we also very powerful nothing
you will see involved an attitude making
an offensive meaning for the whole
country
ok Eric and Nell thank you very much for
taking the time I know you must be
really tired here what's the third
certificate rodeos worth it for Pacifica
in Washington this is Robert Krulwich
and with Ted Clarke Paz : kitty Ferguson
and Paul Chaplin who contributed to this
program wishing you a good evening